Repository ID: RID-PREP-0000
Source: AI_Risk_Repository_Preprint.docx
Section: Abstract
Content Type: limitations
Word Count: 699

Content:
The AI Risk Repository: A Comprehensive Meta-Review, Database, and Taxonomy of Risks From Artificial Intelligence Peter Slattery1,2, Alexander K. Saeri1,2 , Emily A. C. Grundy1,2, Jess Graham3, Michael Noetel2,3, Risto Uuk4,5, James Dao6, Soroush Pour6, Stephen Casper7, and Neil Thompson1. 1MIT FutureTech, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Ready Research, 3School of Psychology, The University of Queensland, 4Future of Life Institute, 5KU Leuven, 6Harmony Intelligence, 7Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to pslat@mit.edu Abstract The risks posed by Artificial Intelligence (AI) are of considerable concern to academics, auditors, policymakers, AI companies, and the public. However, a lack of shared understanding of AI risks can impede our ability to comprehensively discuss, research, and react to them. This paper addresses this gap by creating an AI Risk Repository to serve as a common frame of reference. This comprises a living database of 1612 risks extracted from 65 taxonomies, which can be filtered based on two overarching taxonomies and easily accessed, modified, and updated via our website and online spreadsheets. We construct our Repository with a systematic review of taxonomies and other structured classifications of AI risk followed by an expert consultation. We develop our taxonomies of AI risk using a best-fit framework synthesis. Our high-level Causal Taxonomy of AI Risks classifies each risk by its causal factors (1) Entity: Human, AI; (2) Intentionality: Intentional, Unintentional; and (3) Timing: Pre-deployment; Post-deployment. Our mid-level Domain Taxonomy of AI Risks classifies risks into seven AI risk domains: (1) Discrimination & toxicity, (2) Privacy & security, (3) Misinformation, (4) Malicious actors & misuse, (5) Human-computer interaction, (6) Socioeconomic & environmental, and (7) AI system safety, failures, & limitations. These are further divided into 24 subdomains. The AI Risk Repository is, to our knowledge, the first attempt to rigorously curate, analyze, and extract AI risk frameworks into a publicly accessible, comprehensive, extensible, and categorized risk database. This creates a foundation for a more coordinated, coherent, and complete approach to defining, auditing, and managing the risks posed by AI systems. License This work is licensed under CC BY 4.0 Suggested citation Slattery, P., Saeri, A. K., Grundy, E. A. C., Graham, J., Noetel, M., Uuk, R., Dao, J., Pour, S., Casper, S., & Thompson, N. (2024). The AI Risk Repository: A Comprehensive Meta-Review, Database, and Taxonomy of Risks from Artificial Intelligence. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2408.12622 Guide for readers This is a long document. Here are several ways to use this document and its associated materials, depending on your time and interests. Two-minute engagement Skim the Plain Language Summary (p. 4). Ten-minute engagement Read the Plain Language Summary (p. 4). Read Insights into the AI Risk Landscape (p. 62), and Implications for key audiences (p. 64). Policymakers, Model Evaluators & Auditors Read the Plain Language Summary (p. 4). Skim Detailed descriptions of domains of AI risks (p. 36). Read Insights into the AI Risk Landscape (p. 62) and the Policymakers and/or Auditors subsections of Implications for key audiences (p. 64). Researchers Read the Plain Language Summary (p. 4). Read Figure 1 (p. 15) to understand the methods we used to identify relevant documents and develop two new taxonomies of AI risk; for more detail on how we developed the taxonomies see Best-fit framework synthesis approach (p. 20). Read Insights into the AI Risk Landscape (p. 56), and the Academics subsection of Implications for key audiences (p. 64) and skim Limitations and directions for future research (p. 66). Plain Language Summary The risks posed by Artificial Intelligence (AI) concern many stakeholders Many researchers have attempted to classify these risks Existing classifications are uncoordinated and inconsistent We review and synthesize prior classifications to produce an AI Risk Repository, including a paper, causal taxonomy, domain taxonomy, database, and website To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to rigorously curate, analyze, and extract AI risk frameworks into a publicly accessible, comprehensive, extensible, and categorized risk database The risks posed by Artificial Intelligence (AI) are of considerable concern to a wide range of stakeholders including policymakers, experts, AI companies, and the public. These risks span various domains and can manifest in different ways: The AI Incident Database now includes over 3,000 real-world instances where AI systems have caused or nearly caused harm.